[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. As you probably
suspect, I'm not a big fan of 20th-century
mathematical work at the foundational
level. I think that we are collectively
living in a dream world with objects and
constructions that aren't pegged down to reality.
One of the jobs of this foundational
series is to try to move us gently—or
perhaps not so gently—in a more
realistic and more honest direction. Now,
one of the aspects of this that I'm going to talk
about today is the movement from a 20th-century
object-oriented point of view to a 21st-century
expression-oriented point of view. I want to
tell you what those terms mean to me and give
you some applications of these thinkings to
algebraic curves. We're ultimately wanting
to understand algebraic curves in a good way,
and this is a very pertinent discussion even
though it's sort of at the metamathematical
level. I won't actually be giving mathematically
precise definitions of these terms—object-oriented
and expression-oriented—but I hope you'll get
the gist of it, and it will resonate with you.
Okay, so very roughly, one of the
aspects of 20th-century mathematics
is that it has been object-oriented. People
have had this idea that there are mathematical
objects that are "out there." They're often almost
physical in the sense that we can picture them,
maybe we can graph them or we can model them,
and the idea is that we should try to model
those inside mathematics. So, we take the abstract
picture, and we try to build up some structures
that reflect as accurately as
possible these images that we have.
I believe that 21st-century mathematics is going
to take a quite different approach to things,
where the primary things of interest
are not necessarily mathematical objects
but rather mathematical expressions.
Now, 20th-century mathematics, of course, has many
good things about it and many things also not so
good about it. Some of the things that are not
so good about it are that it's based on Cantor's
set theory and sort of a notion of functions
that goes along with set theory. This is,
unfortunately, an infinite set theory,
and it has all kinds of waffly aspects,
all kinds of imprecisions associated
with it. There are all kinds of
wrong habits of thinking associated with this.
Unfortunately, it's become very much an orthodoxy,
and I'm going to have an uphill
battle trying to convince you to think
clearly about this subject from the beginning
again. Nevertheless, I will try to do that.
Another aspect of 20th-century mathematics is that
it has a very descriptive approach to definitions.
Definitions in the 20th century are sometimes
not much away from being descriptions;
there is not really a distinction between
a description and a specification.
In the 21st century, I believe that
specifications and definitions will
be much closer together. People will not
be looking for a sort of a painting of a
definition but actually asking the question,
"How do we specify mathematical objects?"
20th-century mathematics has the idea that
we try to lock in interpretations. We have
some mathematical object, and we want to lock in
an interpretation of that mathematical object.
I believe 21st-century mathematics is going
to be more flexible and going to allow—and in
fact encourage—multiple interpretations
of the expressions that are involved.
You'll see what I mean; I'm going to amplify
this to some extent, but I just want to
lay this out for now to give
you something to think about.
20th-century mathematics has also been very
oriented towards human visual and tactile
processing. The models and the arguments that are
used are often very close to visual reasoning.
I believe that in the 21st century,
we're going to have to move to a more
computer-oriented frame of mind, where it's
less human-centered and more computer-centered.
In fact, sort of when in doubt about a
mathematical construct or a mathematical
definition or mathematical argument, when there's
debate about whether something makes sense or not,
I think a good way of going forward on that is to
ask ourselves, "Can we encode this on a computer?"
Is your definition precise enough, clear
enough, that somebody can encode it on
a computer? Is your computation explicit
enough that it can be encoded on a computer?
It's some kind of litmus test that gives us
more certainty than a lot of talk. There's a
lot of talk in 20th-century mathematics, which
is largely unsupported by computer equivalence.
Alright, so I want to explain some of this
business. It's going to take me more than
one video to do that—there are many aspects of
this—but it's a general orientation that I've had
throughout this series. You've probably
noticed it in several spots. Now it's
time to be a little bit more specific about what
the differences are and how it manifests itself.
Today, we're going to look at this distinction in
rather only one special direction—the direction
that we've been talking about in the last few
videos having to do with algebraic curves. That's
sort of the application that we have in mind, but
in fact, I'll have a lot more to say about this
in subsequent videos on other aspects of
mathematics. But for today, we're going
to look at how does this actually sort of
practically look like in our study of curves,
and to make things very simple, we're going
to keep things down to the simplest curves.
So, let's have a good look at a very simple
example—the unit circle. What is the unit circle?
In the 20th century, of course, we have this
pictorial representation of it, what we draw in
the xy Cartesian plane, but the actual definition
of it in most textbooks will be pretty well this
one here. To the 20th-century mathematician,
a circle is a set. It's a set of points.
So, it's the set of points (x, y) where x and
y are real numbers that satisfy x² + y² = 1.
Alright, there are all kinds of problems with
real numbers that eventually we're going to
talk at length about, but let's accept
that for now. So, what does this mean?
Well, it's a set, so it's got a lot of elements,
and each element in the set looks like this. It's
a point, so it's got some brackets, and inside
the brackets are two numbers, and those are real
numbers, and they have to have this property.
Alright, so inside this set, for example,
we would find the point (1, 0) because 1
and 0 satisfy this equation. We'd also find
(0, 1), we'd find (3/5, 4/5), we'd find (1/√2,
1/√2), we'd find (5/13, -12/13), (0, -1), but of
course, this is sort of unrepresentative. Most of
the numbers here are wildly much more complicated
than these ones. So, for example, you can let x
be pretty well anything as long as it's in the
range between -1 and 1, say e^-2, and then y will
have to be something like √(1 - e^-4). So, you can
write down something like that, and then you think
of this set as sort of carrying on and on and on.
That's what a circle is. So, if you want to write
down what the circle is, you really are obliged
to write down this set. Of course, we can never
write down this set because of the complexity
involved in these three little dots which are
just tucked away back here almost beyond notice.
But it's these three little dots, of course, that
contain all the complexity—that vast collection
of bigger and bigger ordered pairs
with wilder and wilder numbers in them.
In fact, this is not really an honest
representation at all because it suggests
that you can actually list the pairs in some kind
of order. Well, according to the standard dogma,
this infinite set that we're talking about is not
really at all of this kind. This is not actually
countable, according to the standard dogma.
Okay, so what that means is that the level of
infinity that's supposedly being involved here is
larger than the infinity of natural numbers. Okay,
so even this representation is
somehow completely inadequate.
This kind of idea is very much a
20th-century idea. In previous centuries,
older civilizations would never have thought
about it this way. I'm not sure how they would
have explained what a circle is, but certainly
not in this way. This is vastly too complicated,
and there's somehow dishonesty oozing
out of all corners of this definition.
But repetition renders the ridiculous reasonable.
If you repeat something, even if it doesn't make
a lot of sense, but you repeat it enough times,
eventually it starts sounding
more and more reasonable.
The young student today, the mathematics
student, is exposed to this kind of set
repeatedly, over and over. Everything
is defined in terms of some kind of set,
so you become oblivious eventually to the logical
obscurity of the concept. A circle, to an artist,
is something that's continuous. It's something
that you draw like this. It's not something that
you create by drawing a lot of points. This is
like a pointless kind of definition, where you're
making a lot of points like this—like the
Impressionist school of painting, which was
quite popular for a little while. This is really a
pointless definition and somehow does not reflect
the physical aspect of what we're doing when we're
drawing a circle. There's something very fishy and
very unpleasant, really, about such a definition.
In my opinion, it's way too complicated.
So, I believe that in the 21st century, we're
going to move back to a simpler and more naive
approach to things like the unit circle.
Earlier generations would have said, well,
a unit circle—the essential part of it is this
equation here. It's this equation here that really
captures the circle, and some mathematicians
would have said that the circle is that equation.
And I think that's a definition that needs to
be taken seriously—that the circle really is
encapsulated by this equation. And that equation
is really reflecting the circle. This is a lot
simpler than some vast infinite set with all
kinds of complicated ordered pairs in it.
However, we want to go a little bit further
because this thing here already has some ambiguity
in it because of the x and the y, which are
variables—not something that we've really pinned
down. But we know that we can replace something
like this with an associated poly number—actually
a bipoly number, but I won't always say that. So,
instead of x, we might use alpha; instead of y,
we might use beta. And then we're really
talking about this bipoly number: (-1, 0, 1),
(0, 1). So, this little bipoly number
really kind of encodes the circle.
However, there's a bit of ambiguity left because
we can, in fact, scale this equation and still
have the same circle. In other words, if you come
along and you multiply both sides of this equation
by 2, for example, you get 2x² + 2y² = 2. That
also defines exactly the same circle, and this
equation corresponds to the poly number 2P = (-2,
0, 2), (0, 2). If we bring everything to one side.
So, if we're going to associate the circle
with a poly number, should we associate it
with this one, or should we associate it
with this one, or some other multiple?
Because the actual poly number that we
use, if we scale it, we get the same
geometrical object. So, we have to
incorporate that somehow into the definition.
So, we're going to make a small modification to
the idea of a poly number or a bipoly number.
We're going to talk about
a projective bipoly number.
So, here's a projective bipoly number. It
looks a lot like a bipoly number except that
instead of having one half bracket around
it, it has a double half bracket around it.
That's going to be our convention. That
tells us that this thing is unchanged
if we multiply it by a non-zero number. So,
we're going to agree that this double bracket
tells us that we are allowed to multiply the thing
by any non-zero number, and it doesn't change.
So, this projective bipoly number is the same
as this projective bipoly number, which is the
same as this one, and we might just use a capital
P instead of a small p for the projective object.
Okay, so now we can say, what is a unit circle?
Here's a 21st-century definition, which is not
really that much different from a probably
17th-century definition or an 18th-century
definition, except it's a little bit more
formalized, a little bit more computer-amenable.
The unit circle is the projective bipoly number
C, this one right here: (-1, 0, 1), (0, 1),
with the double brackets telling us
it's a bipoly number that's projective.
That's an expression. When you look at
it, you cannot see a circle immediately.
You have to interpret it in a
way so that you get a circle.
But the expression actually has
a variety of interpretations,
and this is where things get interesting. The
expression is this, but the interpretations
can be many. Let's have a look at a couple of
different interpretations of this expression.
So, our first interpretation, which we'll call
interpretation A, is the standard one—the one that
we really started with. So, here is our projective
bipoly number C, and here it is written out as a
bipoly number in sort of alpha-beta form: -1 +
α² + β². And I put a little bracket around here,
sort of telling us that this is a projective
quantity. It's not exactly a bipoly number
because if we multiply it by 5, it's unchanged.
That's what the meaning of those brackets is.
Okay, so how do we interpret this object?
Well, we associate it with this equation—the
equation obtained by replacing alpha with x, beta
with y, and setting the poly number equal to zero.
So, I've set it equal to zero, and then I happen
to have brought the 1 on the other side to make
it more familiar, but it's really the setting
this equal to zero that's the crucial thing.
And note that if we multiply this
by 5 and set it equal to zero,
it's the same as if we just set this thing equal
to zero. That extra factor or scaling factor
that's in there doesn't have any effect when
we set it equal to zero, so it's a well-defined
thing to do. So, we start from the projective
bipoly number, we get an equation: x² + y² = 1.
And then we can visualize that—well,
actually in a number of different ways.
We can look for those points x
and y that satisfy this equation
and plot those points in the standard Cartesian
form, and we get the circle that's familiar to us.
But somebody else can come along and say, well,
actually I prefer a projective point of view. I
prefer to imagine the Cartesian plane as
a horizontal plane, and I'm looking at it
from some vantage point with the horizon here.
So, there's the y-axis, there's the origin,
there's the x-axis, and then the various lines
y = 1, y = 2, y = 3 will be spread out ahead of
me, increasingly closer and closer together as
they march towards the horizon, and the various
lines x = 1, x = 2, x = 3, they will be like
railroad tracks all meeting at this point at
infinity because they're parallel over here.
Now, if I draw the unit circle in the same sense,
I look at all the points here that I can, that
satisfy the equation, plot a lot of them, and join
some up with some lines, then what will appear is
something that's not quite a circle—it'll be more
elliptic. In fact, it'll be exactly an ellipse,
but nevertheless, that's a picture, almost like
a photograph of this thing if it were lying in
a plane and you actually took a picture
of it with the horizon there as well.
Here's another variant where we still have
Cartesian axes, but the spacing in the x
and the y directions is different. Why not?
That's sometimes useful, and then when we
plot the points that satisfy this, we get a shape
which is again an ellipse—it's a stretched circle,
which is an ellipse. Another variant on that is
this one over here, where we've taken our axes
to be not rectangular—x-axis in
this direction, y-axis up there,
perhaps not equal scaling. We can still plot the
points x and y that satisfy the equation. When
we do so, we'll get another ellipse—this
is an affine transformation of this one.
And now let's enlarge our thinking even more.
Let's suppose that we're visited by a creature
from outer space which is blind. It doesn't have
nice hands like we do; it has some very broad
sort of planks that it uses for hands, so
anything that's two-dimensional is pretty
well invisible to it. It needs to feel something
three-dimensional in order to get a sense of what
we're talking about. So, to such a creature,
if we wanted to represent our unit circle,
drawing it on a piece of paper or even braising
it a little bit like in a braille would not
be good enough. But what we could do is we
could build a cylinder on top of this thing.
So, here's a picture of the xy plane
now, sort of horizontally laid out.
This unit circle here is now along here,
and I've built a cylinder on top of it.
So, our friend from this other planet could
come along and could feel the cylinder
and say, ah, that looks like the unit circle—now
I know what you're talking about. You're
talking about the unit circle—he can feel that.
In fact, anything that you can represent
two-dimensionally in terms of some kind
of curve or conic or whatever you have, you
can always sort of extend it up—directly up,
making a three-dimensional
model, essentially, that this
entity could get a grasp of by grasping this.
So, the sides of it, rather than just the base.
So maybe, from that person's point of
view or that creature's point of view,
this thing really ought to be interpreted
as this cylinder-type of object—really
contains the same amount of information.
If we agree to always go vertically up
the unit circle, the cylinder built on
top of it is pretty well equivalent.
Here's a variant on that
where we, for some reason,
agree to take our unit circle in the base plane
xy and to build a three-dimensional object,
which is obtained by drawing all kinds of lines
from the circle up to a particular point above
it—so kind of some kind of cone. So, we can
imagine some other kind of creature which is
physically oriented so that it can feel that
kind of object—maybe, maybe not this kind.
To such a creature, they could feel this
and say, ah, that looks like a unit circle.
So again, there's something equivalent about
whether we're talking about the circle or whether
we're talking about this cone built on top of
it. They're all possible visualizations of this.
So, this is the idea that to say that a circle
is exactly this is a little bit too limiting—it's
too narrow-minded. There are different
ways of thinking about a circle.
That equation is actually more
fundamental than any of these pictures.
And more fundamental than that equation
is this projective bipoly number from
which the equation comes. That's
the expression; these are various
pictures, visualizations, interpretations of
the object. So, that was interpretation A.
Now I'm going to give you a
quite different interpretation.
Same unit circle represented as a projective
bipoly number—there it is again—but now we're
going to look at that and associate with
it something rather different. We're going
to associate it with the graph z = -1 + x² + y².
So, we replace the alpha with the x and the beta
with the y as before, and now we have a third
variable or a third poly number, if you like,
and we're going to plot points
with three coordinates—coordinate
x, coordinate y, and the z or the third
coordinate—this value here, -1 + x² + y².
We're going to plot that for various
points x and y in the base plane,
and then somehow or another, we're going to
join the dots to get some kind of surface.
Okay, so what does it look like? Well, here is
a representation of three-dimensional space—it's
a pretty well standard representation. I don't
think I've talked very much about this—there's
an x-axis here, a y-axis here, and a z-axis going
up. When looking at it, you should think of this
x-axis as coming out at you, and the x and
y-axes are sort of being on a horizontal plane
with the z-axis being vertical. Now, for a little
bit more information about this three-dimensional
setup, I recommend my WildLinAlg number 9 lecture,
which is three-dimensional affine geometry,
which gives us more detail about what
this coordinate system looks like.
So, what we're planning to do here is we're
going to take various points in the xy plane,
for example, say the point (2, 1). So, the
point (2, 1) is there, and in the plane,
it would be the point roughly like there, and
then we evaluate this thing here at the point (2,
1). So, let x be 2 and y be 1, we get altogether
telling us that the z coordinate associated with
this point would be 4. So, we're going to plot (2,
1, 4), which is some point which is on
this surface—the surface is in green.
It's an elliptic paraboloid—it's actually a
circular paraboloid, which means it's like a
parabola except that it's been rotated, and a
cross-section is, in general, an ellipse—this
is a very circular one. So, if you take
the cross section, you actually get
the unit circle. So, in other words, if z =
0 and we're just looking at the cross section
of this thing—so we're slicing it where
it meets the plane z = 0, in other words,
the xy plane—then we're getting the unit
circle that we were talking about before.
Now, you may notice that in my
scaling of this three-dimensional
reference frame, I have the x coordinate scaled,
and the y coordinate scaled, and along the z
coordinates, I have some markings, but I don't
have any numbers. Why didn't I have any numbers?
Well, because
we're actually thinking of this bipoly number
only up to scaling. If we multiply it by 5,
it's really the same projective object. That
means if we multiply this by 5 and replace
this with 5 times itself, we should
really end up having the same object.
That will not happen if I actually introduce
scaling like 1, 2, -1. Then I will have a specific
elliptic paraboloid. By avoiding scaling
here, I'm incorporating the scaling—that's
the projective aspect of this bipoly number.
So, in other words, with one type of scaling,
this might be 1, and this might be 2. With another
scaling, this might be 2, and this would be 4.
With another scaling, this might be 100, and this
might be 200. So, this picture represents all
of them somehow at once—it's a bit of a trick to
incorporate the projective aspect into a diagram.
It's really well worth thinking about this. Okay,
so what we've done is, instead of thinking about
the unit circle as this circle in the usual way in
the xy plane, we're now thinking about some larger
object—a surface in three-dimensional space whose
cross-section happens to be that original circle.
Now, both of them came from this bipoly number,
so it's really only a point of
view that separates the two.
You can say, "This is the circle." Someone
else can say, "No, no, this is the circle."
You're both just interpreting the expression.
Neither of you can claim to
be completely correct—both
of you are just expressing a point of view
about how to interpret the expression.
Which is a better way might depend on the
application—it might depend on the richness of
results and understanding that result. We're going
to see that this, in fact, this interpretation B
is a very powerful way to think about what
a unit circle is. It's a very powerful way,
so please give this some serious
thought—it might be a little bit
novel thinking to you to think of this unit
circle as actually being that elliptic paraboloid.
So, to better understand the distinction
between these two interpretations,
let's go back to a simpler
one-dimensional situation.
We're going to consider the case of just
a poly number instead of a bipoly number,
but it'll be a projective bipolar number.
So, suppose that we consider this projective
(-6, 1, 1) and it's written in kind of
row form, so probably we should use betas.
So, there it is, there—it's -6 + β + β²,
and it has little brackets in here telling
us that it's a projective object, meaning if
we multiply it by 7, it really hasn't changed.
Okay, so there are two possible interpretations
of what this thing is. One is interpretation A,
which, analogous to the previous discussion,
would say the following: What we need to do
is we need to take this thing here, replace beta,
say, with x's to make it a little more familiar,
so now we have -6 + x + x²,
and we set it equal to zero
and we look for solutions. So, we're setting the
thing equal to zero and looking for solutions.
There's only one variable, so there's only
one line on which the solutions can live—we're
talking about x values that
satisfy this quadratic equation,
and I hope you can all solve that quadratic
for us. So, x = 2 is one solution, and we get
4 + 2 - 6, that's zero, and another one is
-3, that would be 9 - 3 - 6, it's also zero.
So, that's a picture of the solutions to this
equation—this is sort of a one-dimensional analog
of the picture of the unit circle, which was x²
+ y² = 1, solutions to that, solutions to this.
Now, the second interpretation, interpretation
B—what is it going to do? It's going to associate
with the same polynomial a graph. We're
going to introduce another variable, say
y, and we're going to graph y = -6 + x + x²,
going from one dimension to two dimensions. So,
that's the kind of thing that we've been talking
about, about graphing poly numbers, and okay, it's
a parabola—it looks like this. I've deliberately
left the scaling on the y-axis out so that,
well, so that the scaling, which is
inherent here, is reflected in this picture,
and notice that the parabola that we get
has to go through the points 2 and -3.
So, the cross-section of the parabola by this
line gives us the one-dimensional picture of
interpretation A. This interpretation B is a
bigger picture that somehow is telling us more,
but it maybe is more work to get
it, but maybe not because, in fact,
we don't have to solve any quadratic equations
to graph it—we just have to plot a lot of points,
which is straightforward but laborious,
perhaps, if we want a good picture.
So, please make sure you understand
how this distinction in this
smaller case is an exact reflection
of the distinction between
interpretation A and interpretation B
of the unit circle that we talked about.
Okay, well worth really giving
these things some careful thought.
So, let's go back to our unit circle.
We had these two interpretations,
interpretation A, interpretation B. I want
to now talk about another example—another
important example, in fact, I want to talk
about the second most important circle.
The unit circle is the most important circle;
this one is the second most important circle.
Let's have a look at it. Its name is D.
It's also given by a projective poly number.
It looks a lot like the unit circle one, except
that instead of having a -1 here, it has a +1.
As a bipoly number in alpha
and beta, it's 1 + α² + β².
Projectively, now, let's look at this thing
from those two different points of
view—interpretation A, interpretation B.
So, interpretation A—what we do is we associate
with this thing an equation obtained by replacing
alpha with x, beta with y, setting everything
equal to zero. So, if we set everything to zero,
and then maybe we can bring the -1 to
the other side, we get x² + y² = -1.
And now what we should do is we should graph as
many points that satisfy this as we can find.
Okay, but x² + y² = -1—that's not
really a circle in the standard
framework because there are no points x and
y that satisfy that equation. x² and y² are
always positive—when you add them, you still get
a positive number, you're not going to get -1.
Not until we go into the complex numbers,
which we have not talked about yet.
So, over the rational numbers, no
solutions—the picture of this thing is empty.
It seems like there are no solutions—this is
completely uninteresting. How can Wildberger
possibly say this is the second most
important circle? It doesn't even exist!
Well, it depends on how you look at it. Let's
look at it with the eyes of interpretation B.
What do we do there? We associate with this
thing a graph. We take the same expression
1 + x² + y², introduce a third variable, say z,
and then we're going to graph z = 1 + x² + y².
Okay, there's our axis again—x, y, z. You might
want to play around with this if you haven't much
experience with this kind of three-dimensional
plotting, trying to visualize what happens.
That's made easier sometimes by setting one
of the variables equal to zero. For example,
you might set y equal to zero and see what
happens—that's sort of this cross-section,
that'll be a parabola—or set x equal
to zero, or set z equal to zero.
If you set z equal to zero, well then we're back
to this equation here—we're asking where does this
thing intersect the xy plane? The answer is
nowhere. And we can see geometrically why it
doesn't have solutions, because this graph
is one of these elliptic paraboloids—the
same kind as we saw earlier, except that it's
based up here rather than below, so it's just
going up from here. There's no way it actually
meets the xy plane. Nevertheless, it's just as
pleasant a geometrical object as the elliptic
paraboloid that we got for the unit circle.
So, with this interpretation B,
suddenly we're getting something—we're
seeing something that we don't
see with interpretation A.
Alright, that's good, but there is more. There is
a third important interpretation—interpretation C.
Ultimately, perhaps interpretation C will be
even more important than interpretations A and B.
We're going to see later on in this series, when
we start talking about algebraic geometry more,
how the idea contained in this slide ends up
having very big ramifications. Okay, so this
is the tip of an iceberg, and I'm just touching
on it now to plant some seeds in your minds.
What is interpretation C? Well, here is our unit
circle again: -1 + α² + β². We're going to take
this thing, and we're going to associate with it
something slightly new—we're going to associate
with it a correspondence between two points in the
plane. So, instead of having just a single point
(x, y) and asking, does x² + y² = 1? We're going
to take two points and ask something about both
of those points. So, the point A₁ is (x₁, y₁),
the point A₂ is (x₂, y₂), and we're going to ask,
is x₁x₂, which is replacing the α², plus
y₁y₂, which is replacing the β², equal to 1?
So, in interpretation A, we had x² +
y². Now we're breaking that x² into not
x times x, but x₁ times x₂, and we're
breaking the y² into y₁ times y₂.
This makes things a little bit more complicated,
but it also makes things dramatically simpler.
How? Well, first of all, it makes things more
complicated because there are two points now
instead of one—we're talking about a relationship
between two points. So, what we're saying is that
if there's a point A₁ and there's a point A₂,
then these two points may or may not satisfy this
correspondence. Okay, most of the time, they will
not satisfy this, but every so often, they will
satisfy this relation, and then those two points
are special. So, we want to graph both of them at
once. We want to find all pairs that satisfy
this relation—that sounds more complicated.
But what makes it simpler is this observation:
If you fix one of the points, you fix it, and you
ask the question, what are the points A₂ which
are in correspondence with that fixed A₁? Then
it's a linear equation in the coordinates of x₂.
You're getting a line—so the points A₂ which are
in correspondence with a fixed A₁ lie on a line,
and conversely.
So, I'm going to leave it to you as an exercise to
sketch a number of these lines. So, for example,
if we're talking about the point (2, 0), if A₁ was
(2, 0), then this equation would read, that's x₂
and that's zero. So that term would
die—it would be 2x₂ = 1, or x₂ = ½.
That's an equation—x₂ = ½
represents this line right here.
So, all the points which are in correspondence
with (2, 0) are the points lying on this line.
This is called the polar-pole
correspondence, and it plays
a very big role in projective geometry—it's a very
important way of thinking about the unit circle,
and in some sense, it's the most
important aspect of a unit circle.
And just to give you a little bit more examples,
the polar of this point here is this green line
here, the polar of this point here is this
blue line here, the polar of this black point
is this black one here, and you can see,
perhaps, that if the blue point lies on the red
polar, then the red point lies on the blue
polar. You can maybe investigate why that is.
This is just a very brief introduction to this
idea—we're going to talk more about this later.
I want to get you to think about the idea
that there are more than one interpretation.
Let's have a look at this interpretation of the
second most important circle—that invisible circle
that we introduced. Okay, so let's have a look
at this circle D: (1, 0, 1), (0, 1), 1 + α² + β².
So, we're going to associate with that the
correspondence between these two points given
by this equation—same as the last one, except
there's a -1 now on this side instead of a +1.
Okay, so here now I've explicitly shown you
the lines that you get that correspond to
various points A₁. If A₁ is (2, 1), then we get
the line 2x₂ + y₂ = -1. And if A₁ is (-1, 1),
then we get the line -x₂ + y₂ = -1. And if A₁
is the line (0, -1), we get the line that's (0,
-y₂) = -1, or y₂ = 1. So, this is the first case.
If A₁ is up here at the point (2, 1), then here is
its polar line. If A₁ is the point (-1, 1), which
happens to lie on this polar line, then its polar
line of this point is this line here. And if A₁ is
(0, -1), the point where they happen to meet, then
the polar line, I haven't drawn it, is the line
y₂ = 1—it would go through those two points there.
It turns out that this polar-polar relationship
is very, very important. Okay, it's crucially
important for many things in geometry,
but—and I'll explain that at some later point.
So, the message today is I've just
started to introduce this idea that
expressions are more important than objects. Okay,
it maybe goes against our highly visual nature—we
like to see things, and that's good. Okay, but our
computers prefer expressions—concrete, explicit
expressions with numbers, preferably numbers
arranged in nice, concrete, organized fashions.
So, this point of view—expressions are primary,
objects are something that are secondary,
that are associated with expressions, and there
may be various ways of associating objects
with expressions. There may
be different interpretations—I
think this is a very powerful and somewhat
novel idea. Okay, somewhat novel idea.
Next time, we're going to develop
the implications of having this
interpretation A and interpretation B of something
like a unit circle. So, in fact, we're going to
talk about calculus on the unit circle and on this
imaginary circle—the second most important circle.
I hope you'll join me for that. I'm
Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.